# Our First window in XML

So, in this lesson we will create our first User Interface in XML. The first thing that we are going to do is creating a  file named `window.ui` inside `src` and we will start working in there.

We will recreate the application with an entry and a button that sets a window title in UI files, with some tweaks and extra little features.

The first step is writing an XML header in our ui file:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
```

This will ask your IDE/Text editor to mark the code as XML.

Now, we will open an `<interface>` tag that will contain all our UI definitions:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<interface>

</interface>
```

The next step is adding a `<template>` tag, which will indicate the class name that we will be using for our Window + the parent class, in this case, GtkApplicationWindow.

The class name that we will write will be: Our Namespace + Class name. For example, if you Vala namespace was `GtkTutorial` and the class name was `Window`, the class in the `<template>` tag will be `GtkTutorialWindow`.

The attributes taken by `<template>` are:

* `class`: The class name that we mentioned before
* `parent`: The parent class of our `class`

In my case, I would use something as the following:

```xml
<template class="GtkTutorialWindow" parent="GtkApplicationWindow">

</template>
```

And our whole UI file would look something like this:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<interface>
	<template class="GtkTutorialWindow" parent="GtkApplicationWindow">

	</template>
</interface>
```

Now, we will define properties. As we mentioned in the Bindings sections, properties have a name that we will use to set them. E.g, the `GtkWindow` object has the property `default_width`, that can be set to 600 in Vala Code through:

```vala
default_width = 600;
```

And in UI file can be set as:

```xml
<property name="default-width">600</property>
```

As you may remember from the Bindings section in the introduction, all properties have a *string representation*, that is, in GObject terminology, called **name**, that we will be using in our UI files.

Then, let's set the `default-width` and `default-height` in our UI file to 600 and 300 respectively. Try to do it yourself! The answer is right over here:

```xml
<property name="default-width">600</property>
<property name="default-height">300</property>
```

Now, let's set the window title to: "My Application" the property name is `title` too. It would look something like this:

```xml
<property name="title">My Application</property>
```

It is important to mention that the string property values in UI files do not need commas, as you see in the example above. If you put them, your app won't fail, it will just put the commas in the window title too and this might not be what you expected to do.

Now, we will add our titlebar. We have to add it as a `<child>` tag, which will contain the tag `<object>` inside it. The `<object>` tag requires to add as attribute

* Class name: In this case `GtkHeaderBar`

Now, our headerbar definition will look something like this:

```xml
<child type="titlebar">
	<object class="GtkHeaderBar" id="header_bar">
	</object>
</child>
```

Now, we can define the properties of our `GtkHeaderBar` inside that object definition. In this case, we will tell it to show the title buttons. As you may remember from previous lessons, the property name is `show-title-buttons`. Let's write it like this:

```xml
<property name="show-title-buttons">True</property>
```

Our UI file is currently looking like this:


```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<interface>
  <template class="GtkTutorialWindow" parent="GtkApplicationWindow">
    <property name="default-width">600</property>
    <property name="default-height">300</property>
    <property name="title">My Application</property>

    <child type="titlebar">
      <object class="GtkHeaderBar" id="header_bar">
        <property name="show-title-buttons">True</property>
      </object>
    </child>

  </template>
</interface>
```

The next big step is defining children inside of our window. In this case, our window child will be a vertical oriented `GtkBox`.

We will declare children inside of our template with the tag `<child>`, and inside it the `<object>` tag that we just saw. Therefore, our initial declaration of the GtkBox will look like this:

```xml
<child>
	<object class="GtkBox">
	
	</object>
</child>
```

Now, we have to define the orientation as a property. You may recall from previous lessons that we used `Gtk.Orientation.VERTICAL` in the constructor. Well, in this case, now we just would write it like this:

```xml
<property name="orientation">vertical</property>
```

The UI file will assume that you are referring to the `Gtk.Orientation` enumerator, and won't care about capitalization. This is one of my favorite features about UI files, it removes a lot of boilerplate and simplifies it all.

Now, to define boxes internal children we will use the `<child>` and `<object>` tags. The order you put them in the box will be the other they will appear, which removes the confusion that many widgets that are added using `append ()` or `prepend ()`.

Our first child will be a `GtkLabel` with the label "Set a title!". The property of `GtkLabel` which contains the displayed label is named `label` too, so you would write:

```xml
<property name="label">Set a title!</property>
```

And the current `GtkBox` definition that we have looks something like this:

```xml
<child>
	<object class="GtkBox">
		<property name="orientation">vertical</property>

		<child>
          <object class="GtkLabel">
            <property name="label">Set a title!</property>
          </object>
        </child>

	</object>
</child>
```

As you may have noticed, I sometimes add spaces between lines. This is for readability, and you should embrace this too for this same reason ;D

It is important to mention an extra thing that `GtkLabel` has: the possibility to be translated. We will see translations later, but we can add the attribute `translatable="yes"` to tell the build system that it can generate translation files that contain that string (we will see this later, so don't worry)

```xml
<property name="label" translatable="yes">Set a title!</property>
```

We can do this with the window title too:

```xml
<property name="title" translatable="yes">My Application</property>
```

The next step is adding the `GtkEntry` that we need in order to ask a user to set a window title. We will add this as a child for the `GtkBox` and we will give it the `id` of `title_entry`. The declaration inside the box will look something like this:

```xml
<child>
	<object class="GtkEntry" id="title_entry">
            
	</object>
</child>
```

Now, let's set an input purpose as defined in the [GtkInputPurpose enumerator](https://valadoc.org/gtk4/Gtk.InputPurpose.html). We will use the `Gtk.InputPurpose.FREE_FORM` for this entry. As you may relate from `Gtk.Orientation`, we can remove the whole prefixing and just write `free-form`. The `title_entry` definition will look like this:

```xml
<child>
	<object class="GtkEntry" id="title_entry">
		<property name="input-purpose">free-form</property>
	</object>
</child>
```

Let's use this opportunity so learn how to set a placeholder to an entry. The property is called `placeholder-text` and it contains a string. It will tell the user what is the entry for. We will write: "Your window title". Try doing by yourself now that you know how to write Object properties (btw, make it translatable too!). The answer is here, anyways:

<details>

```xml
<property name="placeholder-text" translatable="yes">Your window title</property>
```

</details>

The last widget that we are going to add is the button that when clicked will set the content as window title. We will add it as child of the box too, using the `<child>` and `<object>` tags too. Try imitating your surrounding code to do it yourself. Give the button the id `"entry_button"`. It will have the label "Do it", and it should be translatable.

The answer is right below

<details>

```xml
<child>
	<object class="GtkButton" id="entry_button">
		<property name="label" translatable="yes">Do it!</property>
	</object>
</child>
```

</details>

Your whole UI file will look something like this:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<interface>
  <template class="GtkTutorialWindow" parent="GtkApplicationWindow">
    <property name="default-width">600</property>
    <property name="default-height">300</property>
    <property name="title" translatable="yes">My Application</property>

    <child type="titlebar">
      <object class="GtkHeaderBar" id="header_bar">
        <property name="show-title-buttons">True</property>
      </object>
    </child>

    <child>
      <object class="GtkBox">
        <property name="orientation">vertical</property>

        <child>
          <object class="GtkLabel">
            <property name="label" translatable="yes">Set a title!</property>
          </object>
        </child>

        <child>
          <object class="GtkEntry" id="title_entry">
            <property name="input-purpose">free-form</property>
            <property name="placeholder-text" translatable="yes">Your window title</property>
          </object>
        </child>

        <child>
          <object class="GtkButton" id="entry_button">
            <property name="label" translatable="yes">Do it!</property>
          </object>
        </child>

      </object>
    </child>

  </template>
</interface>
```

And, that's all for this lesson. Next one, we will see how actually use this in the application we have been working on.
