# Using and compiling GResources

Now that we have learned how to create user interfaces in XML, let's learn how to actually use them in real life applications. The thing is, we have some last step before actually getting in there.

GResources provide an easy way in which you can install UI files in your user's machine without having to deal with many variables. It has nice integration with Meson, something important to mention as we will be using it as our build system.

## Creating a GResource file

Let's start by creating a file named after your project's name with the suffix `.gresource.xml`. Something important that I should mentioned is that you should replace spaces and dashes with underscores. For example:

* My project name is `gtk-tutorial`, and I will create file named `gtk_tutorial.gresource.xml`

Now that I have my GResource file, I can start writing the first things needed.

## The things in the .GResource.xml file.

The first things you've got to add in your GResource file, is the XML encoding header just as we did for our UI files

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
```

Now, we will start listing our resources. In this case, the GResources use a tag called `<gresources>`, which basically represents the lists of resources we want to install. We will initiate it and it will look like this:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<gresources>
</gresources>
```

Now, there is another tag we will add inside this `<gresources>` which will actually contain the list of files we want to installed. This tag is called `<gresource>`. This tag has as required information an attribute called `prefix`, in which our files will be internally saved.

But first, let's try to understand how can we create our prefix:

* It should be based on our app id
* Using our app id, we will replace dots with a slash, as well as introducing one in the beginning. It will basically look as a folder path.

For example, if my app id is `io.github.diegoivanme.gtk-tutorial`, my resource prefix will be `/io/github/diegoivanme/gtk-tutorial`.

Now that we have understood how to create a prefix, you might be wondering why are using two tags that look oddly similar: `gresources` and `gresource`. The thing is, we can install various files in different paths just using the same single file. This is specially useful when developing really large applications and we want to keep things more organized. In our case, this won't be necessary.

Having said this, let's write our `<gresource>` tag with our `prefix` attribute:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<gresources>
  <gresource prefix="/io/github/diegoivanme/gtk-tutorial">
  </gresource>
</gresources>
```

The last and single step is adding our files. We can do this with the `<file>` tag, and introducing the name of the file inside its start and end. Just like this:

```xml
<file>window.ui</file>
```

So, let's add this to our GResource too! It will end up looking like this:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<gresources>
  <gresource prefix="/io/github/diegoivanme/gtk-tutorial">
    <file>window.ui</file>
  </gresource>
</gresources>
```

We're done with creating a GResource, now let's talk about how to use them and install them in our system!

## Meson and GResources

Meson allows an easy integration to work with GResources and GResources in general. This makes things way easier for developers who want to ship an app without adding to much clutter in top of what they already have. But first, let's talk about meson modules.

### What is a Meson Module?

Meson modules provide helper methods to achieve more with the Meson build system. A Meson module is first imported:

```meson
my_module = import('modulename')
```

And with that module that you have imported, you can call its methods:

```meson
my_module.some_method('argument')
```

We have a very handy Module for GNOME, GLib and GTK related stuff named `gnome`.

### Using the GNOME Module in our Setup

As mentioned, this module provides utilities to develop GNOME or GTK related projects. One of the utilities it has that will be useful for us in this project, is the possibility to compile GResources and install them in the system to access to them. But first, let's implement it.

In our `src/meson.build` we will import the GNOME module as using the method stated above. We'll write this before declaring `project_files`

```meson
gnome = import('gnome')
```

Now that we have the module, we will use one of its methods: `compile_resources`.

This method requires the following parameters:

* Your project name with the suffix `-resources`
* File name of your `.gresources.xml`
* The `c_name`: Your project name, but with dashes and spaces replaced with underscores (e.g `gtk-tutorial` becomes `gtk_tutorial`)

Now that we have this information, let's write it step by step. We will save the output of this method in a variable named `gresources`. The first thing we have to add is the project name + `-resources`:

```meson
gresources = gnome.compile_resources (
	'gtk-tutorial-resources',
)
```

The next thing is the file name which contains our resource declaration:

```meson
gresources = gnome.compile_resources (
	'gtk-tutorial-resources',
	'gtk_tutorial.gresource.xml',
)
```

And the last thing is our c_name, that we will put with its property name:

```meson
gresources = gnome.compile_resources (
	'gtk-tutorial-resources',
	'gtk_tutorial.gresource.xml',
	c_name: 'gtk_tutorial',
)
```

That's pretty much it! The only thing you have to do is appending this `gresources` variable to your `project_files` one, so it can be installed along them.

```meson
project_files = [
	'main.vala',
	'Application.vala',
	'window.vala',
	gresources
]
```

Finally, you can run `ninja` and everything should be just fine.

If you actually run the application, your window has not been displayed yet, but don't worry, we will get to that very soon...

### Composite Templates in Vala

Now that we have our resources installed, we can use them in our `window.vala` file.

The first thing that we should do is remove any other widget that we have created in the window, as they will override the ones we are trying to display from the UI files. Our file will end up looking like this:

```vala
namespace GtkTutorial {
    public class Window : Gtk.ApplicationWindow {
        public Window (Gtk.Application app) {
            Object (application: app);
        }
    }
}
```

The next step is giving our class the `GtkTemplate` attribute. If you haven't heard about Vala attributes, don't worry, they are very easy to use. Attributes are extra properties you can add to types, classes, methods, signals and objects in Vala. You put them above the declaration of said variable/type/class, etc. These are used internally in compile time. They are composed by the following:

```vala
[AttributeName (variable = value)]
```

In this case, our `GtkTemplate` attribute just requires a single variable to work: `ui`, whose value will be a string with our gresource prefix (that you defined in your `.gresource.xml` file) plus the name of the file you'll be using for it. But this is better to represent it with an example:

```vala
[GtkTemplate (ui="/io/github/diegoivanme/gtk-tutorial)]
```

Great! Now you can add this to the window class to add this attribute:

```vala
namespace GtkTutorial {
    [GtkTemplate (ui="/io/github/diegoivanme/gtk-tutorial/window.ui")]
    public class Window : Gtk.ApplicationWindow {
        public Window (Gtk.Application app) {
            Object (application: app);
        }
    }
}
```

Great! Now running `ninja` and running the app too should display the window you created! Congratulations!