# Improving our application with CSS classes

We have been writting our first user interface using XML, but we have some things missing. Starting with: it currently looks very ugly, but we can improve it with some paddings and colors :D.

So, let's open our XML file for our Window, and let's start working with the `<style>` tags!

## Style classes provided by GTK

Fortunately, GTK provides us with some very useful style classes by default, which we can use to improve how our application looks and feels. So, the first thing we are going to do is give colors to the buttons, as we have done in the introduction to GTK.

Remember when we used `add_css_class ("suggested-action")`? Well, let's use it in UI files. First, look up for the `entry_button` widget in your `window.ui` file. Once you are under the `<object>` tag of that button, you can add a new one: `<style>`.

This tag will allow us to include CSS styles to our object, additional to the ones that are provided by default for the object. In this case, we will add a CSS class with the name of `suggested-action`.

To add a CSS class, we have to open yet another tag: `<class>`, and an attribute with the name of `name`, to indicate the name of the CSS class we will be using.

So, let's see how:

```xml
<style>
	<class name="suggested-action"></class>
</style>
```

As you can see, the `<style>` tag handles all the names of the classes that we will append to this widget, which by the moment is just one. The `<class>` handles the name of the tag with it's namesake attribute. The `<class>` tag closes itself with no values in between, so we can reduce it to this:

```xml
<class name="suggested-action"/>
```

If you compile with `ninja` and run the program, you'll see that our window now has a nice blue button!

Now, we will do something similar with another button missing: The button to delete the current content in the entry.

Let's start adding it to the headerbar. `GtkHeaderBar` has three types of children:

* start: Appends the widget to the left of the headerbar
* title-widget: The widget used for the center aka Window Title
* end: Appends the widget to the right of the headerbar

In our case, it will be at the start: So, under the `<object>` tag of the headerbar, we will open a new `<child type="start">`
tag:

```xml
<child type="start">
</child>
```

Wonderful! Now, let's use an `<object>` tag, saying that we will use a button:

```xml
<object class="GtkButton"></object>
```

For this object, we will use an icon: `user-trash-symbolic`. If you remember previous lessons, we used the `set_icon_name ()` function, but here we can define it as a property of the Widget:

```xml
<property name="icon-name">user-trash-symbolic</property>
```

We will also use a CSS class with the name of `destructive-action`, which will turn the button red.

```xml
<style>
	<class name="destructive-action"/>
</style>
```

Good! If you compile and run back again, you'll see that now we have a red button with a trash bin on it!

Before going to the next session, we will use a style tag for the "Set a title!" label. Let's look for it in the UI file, and follow the steps we have used before to add the `title-1` style tag! You'll have the answer below, but you now should be pretty much an expert on this ;D

<details>

```xml
<style>
	<class name="title-1"/>
</style>
```

</details>

If you compile it an run it, you'll see we now have a larger title ;D

## Align properties

Every GTK widget has certain properties that define its allocation (space used) in a window or space. In this case, we will use them for GtkBoxes.

Our GtkBox that contains our widgets for the UI currently allocates all the widgets to the top of the window and makes them fill all the window horizontally.

Let's explain the properties and enums that make them behave like this.

Halign and Valign are two separate properties that define the place that the widget will be placed in its parent, horizontally and vertically respectively. The enum that determines its behavior has the following:

* Baseline: The widget will follow the baseline. This is not very common to see, as it is optional in containers and can only work vertically. If you use it in an unsupported place, it will fallback to **fill**
* Fill: It will use all the space available either vertically or horizontally. It will be centered in the allocation to be stretched
* Center: Centers the widget in available space without stretching it, it will just get the necessary space it requires in order to allocate its space
* Start: It will allocate the widget at the beginning of the space available. Horizontally (halign), it will always be at the left, and vertically (valign) it will always be at the top.
* End: Allocates the widget at the end of the space available. Horizontally (halign), it will always be at the right, and vertically (valign) it will always be at the top.

So, now that we have understood how this align properties work, we will center our main box at the center of the window space. So, we will use the align properties that have been mentioned before. Our main box should not expand to the sides, it should only use the space that it strictly requires. 

That being said, the enum value that we will use is `center` for both halign and valign. This are represented as properties in the GtkBox. Try doing it in your UI file! The answer will be below here, but I challenge you to do it by yourself:

<details>

First, we will look for the `<object>` of our main box, then we are going to put inside it the halign and valign properties. It's prefered that you put them below the orientation property.

```xml
<property name="halign">center</property>
<property name="valign">center</property>
```

</details>

Compiling and running will make the widgets to now be aligned at the center of the window ;)

## Spacing properties in GtkBox

Currently, our widgets look a little bit too close to each other, and that is not particularly good for us. We can indicate the space between children in a GtkBox with its `spacing` property. It takes an integer as value. You can open the inspector and look for the main box. There, you can increase or decrease the spacing just as you want. Once you have a spacing that you like, you can declare it in UI file using:

```xml
<property name="spacing">your_value</property>
```