# Custom stylesheets in Gtk

In Gtk, you can use custom style-sheets with your own styles, so you do not depend exclusively on Gtk properties and its predefined styles.

Let's begin by creating a `style.css` in our `src/` folder. (Btw, don't worry if you don't know too much about CSS, we will just use some basic things in this chapter ;D)

Using this stylesheet, we will solve one of the issues that our window has: It currently can be compressed to a point it looks a little bit weird. We can create a style for the main_box so it has some padding at the top, bottom, left and right.

Our class name will be `main-box`, and the property we are going to use is `padding`, with it being 36px in each of the places mentioned.

Our `style.css` will look like this:

```css
.main-box {
  padding: 36px;
}
```

We have to add this as a gresource, so let's add it like this to our file:

```xml
<file>style.css</file>
```

Now, that we have installed it, we need to load this into the program. In our `window.vala` file, we will load the CSS provider and apply it to our display. First, let's create a `CssProvider` at the constructor:

```vala
var css_provider = new Gtk.CssProvider ();
```

Now that we have it, let's load it from a resource:

```vala
css_provider.load_from_resource ("/io/github/diegoivanme/gtk-tutorial/style.css");
```

The next thing we are going to do, is add it to our screen (basically, our application). The method that we will use is `Gtk.StyleContext.add_provider_for_display ()`, and it requires the following parameters:

* Screen: The default `Gdk.Display` for our application. You can get it by using the method `get_display ()`
* Provider: The CSS provider you will apply to your display, in this case, it will be `css_provider`
* Priority: Priority expressed in a `uint` value. You can use the constant `Gtk.STYLE_PROVIDER_PRIORITY_USER`

Now that we have understood how to use this function, let's apply it:

```vala
var css_provider = new Gtk.CssProvider ();
css_provider.load_from_resource ("/io/github/diegoivanme/gtk-tutorial/style.css");

Gtk.StyleContext.add_provider_for_display (
	get_display (),
	css_provider,
	Gtk.STYLE_PROVIDER_PRIORITY_USER
);
```

Great! You can compile and run and it will execute. The last step is actually adding the style class in the UI file for our window. Remember that we will use the `<style>` and `<class/>` tags, and it will look like this:

```xml
<style>
	<class name="main-box"/>
</style>
```

Compiling and running back again will have no issues. Now you can reduce the size of your window, and you'll see it will leave a blank space between the widgets and the borders of the window. Congratulations!