# Managing the logic of our application

Currently, our application does pretty much nothing, but we can make it have some functionality!

First, let's learn about how to get objects from a GtkTemplate. Currently, we have been creating widgets in UI files, but we haven't retrieved any from it for us to use it in our programs.

To do this, we need the following stuff:

```vala
[GtkChild] unowned Gtk.Widget object_id;
```

As you can see, we are using back again Vala attributes. The object is `unowned` as it will be managed by GtkBuilder so it can create the template. Then we have to write the same object_id that we have chosen for the object in the template. For example, if we have the following in a UI file:

```xml
<object class="GtkButton" id="sample_button">
	<property name="label">Click Me!</property>
</object>
```

It can be imported in the Vala file like this:

```vala
namespace GtkTutorial {
    [GtkTemplate (ui="/io/github/diegoivanme/gtk-tutorial/window.ui")]
    public class Window : Gtk.ApplicationWindow {
		[GtkChild] unowned Gtk.Button sample_button;
        public Window (Gtk.Application app) {
            Object (application: app);
        }
    }
}
```

Being said this, let's begin.

## Importing our objects in our template

First, we need to identify and give id's to the objects that do not have it. In this case, we did not give an id to the button with the trash icon, so let's give it the id: `clear_button`, and the object will look like this in the UI file:

```xml
<object class="GtkButton" id="clear_button">
	<property name="icon-name">user-trash-symbolic</property>
	<style>
		<class name="destructive-action"/>
	</style>
</object>
```

The rest of the objects have been already given an id, but if you don't remember them (or don't have them) here you got them:

* The only GtkEntry is `title_entry`
* The button labeled with "Do it!" is `entry_button`
 
## GtkCallbacks

As of now, we have been using the `connect ()` method and arrow functions (or lambdas in Vala terminology) in GtkWidgets to make callbacks, but using composite templates we can get it to the next level. We can specify signals within the object and then use a `[GtkCallback]` attribute in a method, and GtkBuilder will automatically connect both.

But let's learn how to use one. In the UI file, we need the `<signal>` tag, which will have the following attributes:

```xml
<signal name="name_of_the_signal" handler="callback_method_name"/>
```

We have already seen a couple of signals, like `clicked` in a button. For the `clear_button` purpose is clearing the entry, so let's start by adding a functionality to that button.

The signal name, is `clicked` as that is the signal that we want to be triggered in order to execute its functionality. The handler name is usually built using the following:

```
object_id_signal_name_cb
```

As you can see, there's a prefix: `_cb`, which stands for callback. In this case, the handler name will be: `clear_button_clicked_cb`. So, in the UI file, it will look something like this:

```xml
<signal name="clicked" handler="clear_button_clicked_cb"/>
```

And the whole object will look something like this:

```xml
<object class="GtkButton" id="clear_button">
	<property name="icon-name">user-trash-symbolic</property>
	<signal name="clicked" handler="clear_button_clicked_cb"/>
	<style>
		<class name="destructive-action"/>
	</style>
</object>
```

Now that we have this, let's work in the functionality. The object that we need to get from the template is currently just the GtkEntry, so let's write that inside our Window class:

```vala
[GtkChild] unowned Gtk.Entry title_entry;
```

Let's get the callback. As you may recall, we need the `handler` name. In this case, the declaration in the Vala file will look something like this:

```vala
[GtkCallback]
void clear_button_clicked_cb () {
}
```

So, now that we have this, basically to clear the entry we just need to set its text to `""`. Let's do that inside our `clear_button_clicked_cb` method:

```vala
title_entry.set_text ("");
```

You can compile and run, and you'll see that whatever you write in the entry will disappear when you click the button!

The next thing we are going to do is manage the callbacks from the `entry_button`. In this case, this button must pick the text from the Gtk.Entry and put it as window title.

So, we are going to make a callback with the name of `entry_button_clicked_cb`. I challenge you do it by yourself, both for the logic and the UI file, but you can see the answer below:

<details>

So, we are going to write the following in the entry_button object:

```xml
<signal name="clicked" handler="entry_button_clicked_cb"/>
```

And, we are going to write the following in the Window.vala file:

```vala
[GtkCallback]
void entry_button_clicked_cb () {
	set_title (title_entry.text);
}
```

</details>

Now we are done! You can compile and run your program and you'll see it up and running! Congratulations you've made it this far!