# Creating a Flatpak Manifest for our app

In this chapter, we will learn the basics of Flatpak and how to make our application one.

The first thing we are going to do, is creating a manifest. We will divide this lesson in various sections to build one step by step.

Let's create a `.json` file in the base directory of your project, with the name of your app id. In my case, it will be `io.github.diegoivanme.gtk-tutorial` (if you don't remember yours, check out your `Application.vala` in the `application_id` property at your constructor.

## The basics of a manifest

Our Flatpak application has some basic five basic properties:

* Application ID: The unique identifier (usually a reverse domain) for your application
* Runtime: The platform you are using for your app, that indicates the software instructions that your app will follow when it is running
* Runtime Version: The version of the runtime you are using for your application
* SDK: The set of tools that you are using for your application. In the case of GTK, it is `org.gnome.sdk`
* Command: Usually, the name of the binary of your app. In the project that we created, it would be `meson.project_name()`, in my case, `gtk-tutorial`

But now, let's see this in practice. Let's open our manifest file and add the basic properties. If you are not familiar with JSON, don't worry, we won't really make and advanced use of it in this chapter.

Let's open brackets and start defining the properties of our application.

```json
{

}
```

The first one will be the *Application ID*. The property name is `app-id` and we will use the ID used for our Gtk.Application in `Application.vala` as mentioned before, in my case:

```json
"app-id": "io.github.diegoivanme.gtk-tutorial"
```

The next one will be the runtime. As we are working with GTK, we will use `org.gnome.Platform`. By the way, you must have this installed in your system! You can install it from the Flatpak CLI by using:

```sh
flatpak install flathub org.gnome.Platform
```

And select the option with the version 41, as we will be using it.

The property name in the manifest is `"runtime"`, so we will write it as the following:

```json
"runtime": "org.gnome.Platform"
```

Our file currently looks like this:

```json
{
	"app-id": "io.github.diegoivanme.gtk-tutorial",
	"runtime": "org.gnome.Platform"
}
```

Remember to write the commas after each property, they are essential for JSON!

The next property is the runtime version being used for our application. As we have mentioned before, we will be using the version 41 from `org.gnome.Platform`. The property name is `"runtime-version"` and we will write it as the following:

```json
"runtime-version": "41"
```

Then next one is the Software Development Kit. You also **must** have this one installed in your system. You can install it by using:

```sh
flatpak install flathub org.gnome.Sdk
```

And we will also use the 41 version ;). The property name in the manifest is `"sdk"`, and it will look like this:

```json
"sdk": "org.gnome.Sdk"
```

The last of the essentials in a Flatpak manifest is the command. In this case, it is preferred to use our `meson.project_name ()`, in my case, `gtk-tutorial`. The property is named: `"command"` and it will look like this:

```json
"command": "gtk-tutorial"
```

Our JSON file currently looks like this:

```json
{
	"app-id": "io.github.diegoivanme.gtk-tutorial",
	"runtime": "org.gnome.Platform",
	"runtime-version": "41",
	"sdk": "org.gnome.Sdk",
	"command": "gtk-tutorial"
}
```

## Finishing / Finish args

As mentioned in the `README.md` of this section, every Flatpak application is sandboxed, and this limits it to very strict situations. We can lighten this using the `"finish-args"`, which is the sandbox permissions that it can use. There are various for Flatpak, each one with its individual use case, but we will use just some of them:

* `"--socket=wayland"`: This one allows applications to use Wayland to display windows.
* `"--socket=fallback-x11"`: For those users not using Wayland, it will run on X11 as fallback.
* `"--share=ipc"`: The process intercommunication access. This one is actually not necessary under Wayland, but X11 requires it for the share memory extension, and if we don't grant it, the application will have performance issues under X11.
* `"--device=dri"`: This one allows us to have OpenGL rendering aka hardware acceleration, aka performant graphical applications. This one is specially used with GTK4 as it now has Hardware Accelerated rendering!

Now, we will add this one in an array in the property `"finish-args"`. If you don't know how to use arrays in JSON, just open square brackets and write those in a list. Our args list will look like this:

```json
"finish-args": [
		"--socket=wayland",
		"--socket=fallback-x11",
		"--share=ipc",
		"--device=dri"
]
```

## Cleanup

Cleanup indicates the file types, files or directories that are generated in compilation, and are not necessary, so they will be deleted. In this case, I won't explain what does each one of them, as they are not necessary. You usually won't mess up with these either, so don't think too much about it.

The property name is `"cleanup"` and we will use an array too. It will look like the following:

```json
"cleanup": [
    "/include",
    "/lib/pkgconfig",
    "/man",
    "/share/doc",
    "/share/gtk-doc",
    "/share/man",
    "/share/pkgconfig",
    "/share/vala",
    "*.la",
    "*.a"
]
```

## Modules

The modules section in our Flatpak Manifest will contain the name, build system and sources of our application and some other programs/libraries that we might need. In this case, we currently do not need any extra libraries, but we need to specify our project module.

A module is composed by the following:

* Name: The name of our module. In the case of my project's, "gtk-tutorial"
* Build System: The build system used for the project. In our case, meson
* Config options: The options parsed to the build system. We are not using any, by the moment, but we will use them in the future, as we learn how to create them in Meson too.
* Sources: The files and information about our modules, which include:
	* Type: The source type of our project. This includes but are not limited to:
		* `archive`: Compressed files (`.tar`, `.zip`)
		* `git`: For git repositories. This can have `url` either an online repository or a local one.
		* `dir`: We will use this one (in case you are not using git instead)
	* URL: Where the files are hosted/located (just applies to `archive` and `git`, or `dir` if it is not locally hosted)
	* Path: For those that are locally hosted, applies for `dir`

In our case, we are using `dir`. Now, let's build our modules section:

```json
"modules": [

]
```

That's how we will declare the array of modules, now let's add the objects that we need for each module:

```json
"modules": [
	{
	
	}
]
```

This very unique module that we are using for this manifest will be our project itself, so let's write its properties as defined above:

In the case of `"name"`, it will be `meson_project_name ()`, in my case, `gtk-tutorial`. For buildsystem, meson, and the sources will be `dir`, as defined by the following chunk of code:

```json
"sources": [
	{
		"type": "dir",
		"path": "."
	}
]
```

And our module section will be like this:

```json
"modules": [
	{
		"name": "gtk-tutorial",
		"buildsystem": "meson",
		"sources": [
			{
				"type": "dir",
				"path": "."
			}
		]
	}
]
```

And, finally, our JSON file will look like this:

```json
{
	"app-id": "io.github.diegoivanme.gtk-tutorial",
	"runtime": "org.gnome.Platform",
	"runtime-version": "41",
	"sdk": "org.gnome.Sdk",
	"command": "gtk-tutorial",

	"finish-args": [
		"--socket=wayland",
		"--socket=fallback-x11",
		"--share=ipc",
		"--device=dri"
	],

	"cleanup": [
    "/include",
    "/lib/pkgconfig",
    "/man",
    "/share/doc",
    "/share/gtk-doc",
    "/share/man",
    "/share/pkgconfig",
    "/share/vala",
    "*.la",
    "*.a"
	],

	"modules": [
		{
			"name": "gtk-tutorial",
			"buildsystem": "meson",
			"sources": [
				{
					"type": "dir",
					"path": "."
				}
			]
		}
	]
}
```

Now, let's build our Flatpak package! For this, we need a binary named `flatpak-builder` that is available in Linux Distros with Flatpak support (i.e most distros)

Now, we will use the binary with certain options:

We will tell it we want it to:

* Install in user namespace => `--user --install`
* Clean the files after installation => `--force-clean`
* Use a folder named `builddir` for the construction files => `builddir`
* Use the manifest with the name `my.app.id.json` => `my.app.id.json`

That being said, the command that will be executed will be:

```sh
flatpak-builder --user --install --force-clean builddir my.app.id.json
```

Executing this, will build and install the whole package in our user namespace, and we can run it with:

```sh
flatpak run my.app.id
```

Congratulations! You've just built your first Flatpak!