# Grids and boxes

So, now that we want to have more things in our window, we must have a way to organize them properly, without stacking one in top of other, so we will create `GtkBoxes` and `GtkGrids`.

You can use the same file as before, or you can create a copy of it inside a folder named *02*. Now, let's begin.

Grids allow us to put various widgets inside it, but we can also make them to use more space than others, let's see how we can do it.

Let's remove the creation of the label and when we append it to the window, so we'll leave the file something like this:

```vala
public static int main (string[] args) {
    var app = new Gtk.Application (
        "io.github.diegoivanme.gtk-tutorial",
        ApplicationFlags.FLAGS_NONE
    );

    app.activate.connect (() => {
        message ("Hello World");
        var window = new Gtk.ApplicationWindow (app);
        window.set_title ("Hello World!");

        window.present ();
    });

    return app.run (args);
}
```

Now, we will create a new Grid with the following line:

```vala
    var my_grid = new Gtk.Grid ();
```

You should add before presenting the window and before calling the GtkMain, **this is important**. So, now that we have a grid, let's create 3 widgets to add them to the grid! We will add a label, a button, and an icon (like those cool symbolic icons you see in view switchers, sidebars in your favorite apps).

We can create those three by using:

```vala
var button = new Gtk.Button ();
var my_icon = new Gtk.Image ();
var my_label = new Gtk.Label ("This is my label");
```

Now, let's add some stuff to the button and the icon! First, we will go with the button:

```
button.set_label ("Press me!");
```

By the moment, this button does nothing, but in the next chapter we will add some more functions to it, so it becomes cooler! Let's continue with the image

```
my_icon.set_from_icon_name ("open-menu-symbolic");
```

So, what is this doing? It is taking the image instance that we have named under ´my_icon´ and it sets an icon from the GNOME Icon Library, that contains a large variety of them. If you do not know the whole lot of them, do not worry, you can install [an app](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.gnome.design.IconLibrary) to check them individually and copy the string name if you don't want the open-menu icon (is the hamburger menu icon that you see in most applications for the primary menu).

Now, let's do magic with the grid!

We will attach them to it, it is based on coordinates. But it's better to understand it with code, isn't it?

So, a grid has this parameters:

```vala
Gtk.Widget child, int left, int top, int width = 1, int height = 1 
```

Let's explain one by one: ´child´ can be any ´GtkWidget´, this includes pretty much anything that can be shown in a window, labels, buttons, spin buttons, icons, etc. It is basically what we want to attach. ´left´ and ´top´ indicate the position from those points. 0 for ´left´ would be the first item from left to right, and 0 for ´top´ would be the first item from up to down. The last two, ´width´ and ´height´ have already some parameters set: 1, so if you don't parse anything, the default height and width of ´child´ is 1. But what do these mean? Basically, a Grid is divided in small squares, 1 is the default for any ´child´ you attach, but you can specify if you want to add more!

Now, let's continue coding. Our first line will be...

```vala
my_grid.attach (button, 0, 0);
```

As you can see, I'm not parsing any value on `width` and `height`, so it defaults to one for both. Now, let's continue with:

```vala
my_grid.attach (my_label, 1, 0);
```

As you can see, this one takes the second position from left to right and remains on the top. Now, let's add the icon!

```vala
my_grid.attach (my_icon, 0, 1, 2, 2);
```

As you can see, this one takes 4 squares in total, 2 from left to right and 2 from up to down, and takes the first position from left to right and the second from up to down.

Let's add the grid to the window:

```vala
window.set_child (my_grid);
```

Now, we can compile with:

```sh
valac main.vala -o my_first_app --pkg gtk4
```

And let's run it!
