# Buttons in the headerbar

You problably have already noticed, the headerbar that is on our apps is not as big as the one you see in the apps you use in your day to day. This is because we really haven't use a HeaderBar, at least, a GtkHeaderBar. So let's see how can we use one:

Windows have the method `set_titlebar`, which takes a GtkWidget as it single parameter. It can be **any** GtkWidget, but we will use a GtkHeaderBar almost in every case. So, first, let's create a HeaderBar

```vala
var header_bar = new Gtk.HeaderBar ();
header_bar.set_title ("My App");
```

We have created a headerbar with pretty much nothing, just a title. So, let's append it to our window:

```vala
window.set_titlebar (header_bar);
```

```sh
valac main.vala -o my_first_app --pkg gtk4
```

And, that's it!, our HeaderBar just looks like the others, yay!. But... where did the buttons go?. Well, they are no longer there because the GtkHeaderBar is by default hiding them, we can show them with the method:

```vala
header_bar.set_show_close_button (true);
```

And, let's run it again. And, they're back. Well, now let's see how can you add buttons in there! As always, let's create a button first 

```vala
var button = new Gtk.Button.with_label ("My Button");
```

Now, how can we put it in the headebar? Well, the headerbar has two methods to do this: `pack_start` and `pack_end`, that will pack pretty much any `GtkWidget` to the left or right respectively. Let's try it

```vala
header_bar.pack_start (button);
```

Let's compile and run again!

```sh
valac main.vala -o my_first_app --pkg gtk4
```

Now, you have a button over there! But let's make this cooler. Let's use **colors**!. You may have seen blue or red buttons before in several applications, but you have probably been wondering how can we put them like that. Well, we can use their style context to add a css class named "suggested-action" for blue and "destructive-action" for red!.

Let's paint it blue first!

```vala
button.get_style_context ().add_class ("suggested-action");
```

And, let's compile and run to see what happens

```sh
valac main.vala -o my_first_app --pkg gtk4
```

And, a nice blue button has appeared! Now, you may have noticed that windows are a little bit small, so let's learn how to set them a `width` and `height` for their default usage.

We will use the method `set_default_size` (pretty self-descriptive, right? hehe)

```vala
window.set_default_size (600, 400);
```

In which `600` is the width and `400` is the height. Let's compile and run, and boom! A big window now!
