# Properties and bindings

GLib and GObject are very cool libraries. Vala is built on top of them, and every GtkWidget that you see is in fact, a GObject, and they have some very cool features, among them: *binding* properties between objects. You will use this several times during your projects. But let's see them while we learn about another GtkWidget: GtkSwitch

Have you seen those switches in your apps, to enable or disable a boolean property in your apps? Well, those are switches! Let's play around with them. First, let's learn how to create one. We will use the same window with our headerbar from the last excersise so you don't have to write all again.

Let's create a box to store our Widgets

```vala
var box = new Gtk.Box (Gtk.Orientation.VERTICAL, 5);
```

Now, let's create a switcher

```vala
var my_switcher = new Gtk.Switch ();
```

And let's pack it to our box

```vala
box.pack_start (my_switcher, false, false);
```

Now, let's compile and run

```sh
valac main.vala -o my_first_app --pkg gtk+-3.0
```

And... what? Why is my switcher ***wide***?. Well, meet `halign`. This is a property that tells the widget in which position or *alignment* it should keep. Now, let's add the following line to our code:

```vala
box.set_halign (Gtk.Align.CENTER);
```

`Gtk.Align` is an enumerator that contains the possible alignments the widget can have. Now let's run our program again, and now it should work perfectly fine. Now, let's add another switcher and let's experiment with some properties and *bindings*

Let's replace our current switcher for a better name and let's add the second:

```vala
var my_switcher_one = new Gtk.Switch ();
var my_switcher_two = new Gtk.Switch ();

box.pack_start (my_switcher_one, false, false);
box.pack_start (my_switcher_two, false, false);
```

Now, compile and run, and you'll see there is one switcher more. Let's play around with bindings. Bindings allow you to write syncronize certain properties of your object according to other property of another object. Let's see it with an example. Let's make switch one and switch two coordinated: when one is active, the second is too and viceversa. 

The property of the Switch that indicates when it's active, it's, well, `active`. Before playing with that property, let's try to get it with the button on the headerbar when it's clicked.

```vala
button.clicked.connect (() => {
    message (@"Switcher one is: $(my_switcher_one.active.to_string ())");
    message (@"Switcher two is: $(my_switcher_two.active.to_string ())");
});
```

Let's compile and run:

```sh
valac main.vala -o my_first_app --pkg gtk+-3.0
```

Now, when clicking the button, it should tell us the switcher status with the active property. Let's get started with bindings.

To bind a GObject property, we use the method `bind_property ()`, and it takes the following parameters:

```vala
MyObject.bind_property (string object_property, GObject target_object, string target_object_property, BindingFlags flags);
```

In which:

* `object_property` is the property in the 'host' object
* `target_object` is the GObject we want to bind a property from
* `target_object_property` is the property we want to bind from `target_object`
* `flags` is the "way" we are going to bind our properties. We'll use them in more detail later on.

You might feel a little bit confused about properties being ´strings´. Basically, every property within a GObject has its """"representation"""" as strings. It's important to say that if you property is named ´my_property´ it's string representation will be ´"my-property"´ or ´"my_property´. Both are actually valid, but the first one, with the replaced underscore, is more common to find in apps, so let's stick to it by convention.

Let's make the switcher one and two have the same status as active when they're changed.

```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property ("active", my_switcher_two, "active", BindingFlags.DEFAULT);
```

As you can see, the first `BindingFlag` that we are using is `DEFAULT`, but let's see it in action

```sh
valac main.vala -o my_first_app --pkg gtk+-3.0
```

And... Well, we turn on the switcher one and it's working fine, but when we change the second... the first one does not change. Exactly: BindingFlags.DEFAULT has a single direction: ´my_switcher_one´ binds to ´my_switcher_two´ but not viceversa. Well, we can put the same for switcher two, right?

```vala
my_switcher_two.bind_property ("active", my_switcher_one, "active", BindingFlags.DEFAULT);
```

If you compile and run this, it will work, but this does not mean is the most viable implementation. We have another `BindingFlag`, named `BIDIRECTIONAL`, that will help us to make it for both. We can delete our previous line of code and write, instead

```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property ("active", my_switcher_two, "active", BindingFlags.BIDIRECTIONAL);
```

And, that's it!, you'll see it's now an options for both widgets in both properties. But... you may have noticed that there is a small delay between two properties, but there's a binding flag to fix that too! BindingFlags.SYNC_CREATE.

```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property ("active", my_switcher_two, "active", BindingFlags.SYNC_CREATE);
```

Compile and run, and... works fine, but we find the same issue that we had for other BindingFlags, but, I have a surprise for ya, you can use TWO BindingFlags for this cases. Let's see how. 

We will use pipes (`|`) to use two binding flags. So now, let's implement that.

```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property ("active", my_switcher_two, "active", BindingFlags.BIDIRECTIONAL | BindingFlags.SYNC_CREATE);
```

And... It's magic! It works perfectly fine. But, before going, let's imagine that you want to make want switch deactivate other when it is active. Well, there's a `BindingFlag` for that: `INVERT_BOOLEAN`. Let's learn how to use it:

```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property ("active", my_switcher_two, "active", BindingFlags.INVERT_BOOLEAN);
```

And, works perfectly fine. But what if we want to do it Bidirectional? Well, let's pipe another binding flag:

```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property ("active", my_switcher_two, "active", BindingFlags.INVERT_BOOLEAN | BindingFlags.BIDIRECTIONAL);
```

It should work fine now. If you see that it does not seem to work when the app starts, this is perfectly normal, you did not assign a value after you created the bindings, but you can if you want!

Write this after creating the bindings:

```vala
my_switcher_one.set_active (true);
```

And, it now starts just as you would expect. Before going, let's see some more cool stuff:

* There is a method called `set_property (string property_name, Value value): You can also implement it in your code if you are going to use a method to set a value to an Object's property.

* A general property on ´GtkWidget´s is sensitive. Have you seen those buttons or switches you can't interact with and have a slightly gray color? Well, the property ´sensitive´ makes them take this color. Little challenge here, try making the second switch not sensitive if the first one is active. ´sensitive´ is a boolean property. Answer below

<details>
```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property ("active", my_switcher_two, "sensitive", BindingFlags.INVERT_BOOLEAN);
```
</details>

By the way... Let's talk about code style for a moment. You may have noticed that lines of code like:

```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property ("active", my_switcher_two, "active", BindingFlags.INVERT_BOOLEAN | BindingFlags.BIDIRECTIONAL);
```

Are very long. Probably more than what they should. We can use some code style to make them look prettier. There are various ways, including but not limited to:

```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property (
    "active",
    my_switcher_two,
    "sensitive",
    BindingFlags.INVERT_BOOLEAN
);
```

As you can see, this gives each parameter one line of code.

```vala
my_switcher_one.bind_property ("active",
                               my_switcher_two, "active",
                               BindingFlags.SYNC_CREATE | BindingFlags.BIDIRECTIONAL);
```

As you can see, this one places each object with its property, and uses a line of code for the BindingFlags.

One last thing, if the project that you are contributing to uses a certain style, **embrace it**. Just as the GNOME Code Guidelines say: "check the surrounding code and try to imitate it". You obviosuly have the right to express your opinions on a certain coding guidelines. If you directly thing a practice is *bad*, communicate with the app mantainer and have a respectful conversation, explain your points. We **must** colaborate to have nicer code ;)
