# Debugging your GTK Application

Last lesson, I invited you to test different animations for the Stack. If you did try it, didn't you find annoying recompiling and recompiling and running again? Well, there is a very cool tool to actually try various settings from your Window without having to edit the source code and recompile. This tool is called GtkInspector

But, how do we get it? Well, you can enable it by changing the `GSettings` of your system. The `GSettings` are a couple of configurations that your system or applications of your system have set in a `GKeyFile`. You can modify them by using the following tools:


## DConf Editor

DConf editor is a GUI Tool to modify GSettings. You can get it from (flathub)[https://flathub.org/apps/details/ca.desrt.dconf-editor]. We will be navigating in a File Manager-like environment, with folders and subfolders. We will follow the next path in order to get to the settings:

```
org -> gtk -> settings -> debug
```

Now, you will get to an inteface with a couple of Switches. You will turn on the setting with the name "enable-inspector-keybinding"

## gsettings CLI tool

We can use the command-line interface to play around with our `GSettings`. It is named `gsettings` and takes the following arguments to change a setting

```sh
gsettings set [appid] [keyname] [value]
```

In order to enable GtkInspector, type the following:

```sh
gsetttings set org.gtk.Settings.Debug enable-inspector-keybinding true 
```

## The keybinding

And what's the so called keybinding? Well, run your application and press Ctrl+Shift+I. And it will open a nice window with a couple of settings.

## Quick Tour

Press the button with an icon of a radar and select the the label in the first page of your window that you created on the last excersise. You have just used the GtkWidget selector. Now, click on the button with the list-view icon. Now, you will get the tree view of your window, with the widgets and its children. You can see here more visually which Widgets are the parents of others. Now, it should have highlighted you the GtkLabel widget, go to its parent, in this case, the GtkStack.

As you can see, it has opened a part of the window with some stuff, including memory allocation, some information about the label that you currently do not have to completly understand. Go to the combobox in the left and select the option "properties". Now, you will see a table of all the properties of the Stack. Go to the `transition-type` section, and click on its value column. Now, a popover will open with a series of possible values, all the values on the enumerator. Now, you can try each one of them without having to recompile!

You will use this tool quite frequently, in order to test some of your widgets without having to recompile.
